if you believe in God then you believe
that the world was created and if the
world is created
um then you know ipso facto the natural
order itself is imbued with with the
order in the natural order the
regularity and the vagaries they're
imbued with us with a sense of morality
the material world is a lot more
spiritual than we might conceived well
well one of the ways you you can think
about that practically because it sounds
like a strange abstraction is that if
you and I decide that we're going to do
a joint venture in relationship to
Mining and we don't treat each other
fairly and honestly the probability that
our mining Endeavor is going to be
successful is pretty much zero yeah
because we're going to run into so many
entanglements over time that it's going
to make the Practical operations
impossible and so you might say that in
order to come to some concordant grip
with the vagaries of the natural world
there's an ethic you have to manifest
and that seems to that seems to be part
and parcel of your sense too that to to
operate morally also means to align
yourself self with the proper rhythms of
Nature and to pay attention to the
proper ratios of scarcity and their
principles of the natural world that you
have to abide by in order to play a
productive game
foreign
[Music]
hello everyone watching on the YouTube
platform and Associated podcasts
I'm here today with Roy sabag who I met
about a year and a half ago
continuing my investigation into the
field of Economics I suppose in monetary
policy monetary conceptualization as
well something I'm woefully
undereducated in relationship to Roy's
had a remarkable career as an
entrepreneur businessman and as a
thinker he's recently published a book
The Natural order of money which is what
we're going to talk about today trying
to puzzle through just exactly what
constitutes money and how it might be
productively contemplated
psychologically biologically to some
degree at least in terms of its
potential biological implications
economically sociologically
philosophically theologically we kind of
we're going to try to cover all the
bases as Roy's book does and so I
thought we'd begin this conversation by
uh having Roy talk about his background
so that all of you who are listening
have some reason
to understand why he's doing what he's
doing and perhaps why his ideas might be
regarded as compelling and credible yeah
so Roy
um we met a year and a half ago
um you started to talk to me about
about the thought that you've put into
the idea of money for really for what's
Decades really eh and then you handed me
this manuscript which was an early
version of the book and we've been
talking about it to some degree ever
since there are variants of it and so
let's walk through your the history of
the development of your businesses so
people can get an idea of the range of
activities that you engaged in so what
what did you start with on the
entrepreneurial front the first thing I
started with an entrepreneurial front
was actually buying and selling uh
physical Minds so uh iron and you did
that how at all how old uh probably 25
yeah 25 26. so that gave you a taste for
for Real World engagement because
there's something very concrete about
about minds and and from what you've
told me you you went and visited a
number of months yeah and so and so how
did you get involved in investing in
something as complex as the mining
industry at such a young age and why did
you pick mining it's actually a good
question so
when I started in finance I was what you
might call a value investor in in the
Graham and Dodd method which is the the
method espoused by Warren Buffett and a
lot of the famous investors so the idea
was that you were looking at a share of
stock as a piece of a actual business
and your task as a security analyst was
to um essentially value the business
come up with an estimation of value
known as intrinsic value and then you
would seek to capitalize when the price
in the market was at a discrepancy or a
Delta from that you know estimation of
intrinsic value so so you had to learn
to investigate something like intrinsic
value conceptually right from the
beginning right that started you
thinking about what intrinsic value
might actually constitute in some deep
sense I would presume absolutely but in
this case uh the method is simply an
abstract one I mean you know you're
looking at financial statements so
you're analyzing um filings the
companies that are publicly traded have
to make such as 10K filings 10q filings
or annual reports in other countries and
then you're learning to study basically
three statements the balance sheet the
income statement and the cash flow
statement and you're building models
either in your mind or in actual
spreadsheets and you're looking to see
if you can make an estimation of
intrinsic value now normally what you're
doing is you're taking the sum total of
potential cash flows that the business
might earn and then you're discounting
it back to the present at an appropriate
discount rate now this becomes very
important
um so so you're actually what you're
really doing is you're valuing time
um but but I I don't want to get into
that just because it's a bit of a
complex issue um but the other aspect of
this of this Theory uh or or method of
investing is Benjamin Graham the founder
he had this view that uh the stock
market had evolved into a kind of um
dual nature Beast on the one hand there
were speculators that were just trying
to buy something and sell it for the
sake of you know like a hot potato
but the actual for a quick profit for a
quick profit right um they were like the
the merchant in the bazaar that was just
turning over their inventory but on the
other hand there were the business
owners the large shareholders uh the
Proprietors and to them the machinations
in the market the daily movements were
meaningless
so the way they looked at a business was
actually what was the profitability of
the business what would the potential
dividends be uh what would the sum of
parts of the business be in a
liquidation and what he noticed was uh
he called it Mr Market you know Mr
Market shows up every single day and
tells you that your share of stock is
worth this or that and he's kind of a
schizophrenic you know one day he says
your your Shares are dear uh and and the
other day uh you know they're not and
your job as a security analyst is to
disregard those daily machinations the
only thing that's important for you are
the actual business results right so
you're trying in some sense as a value
investor to put yourself in the seat of
a living business owner yes and to see
what the productive potential of the
business is over time that's right right
right and so in some sense you have to
get down to whatever the fundamentals
are and it's not so obvious what the
fundamentals of a business might be
that's right so you have to familiarize
yourself with with a few things but but
on the surface the the idea behind the
method did is that you would take the
financial information that's available
to everyone you would come up with an
estimation of intrinsic value you would
use you know your your discounting
mechanism whatever it is and then you
would go out into the market and look
for these situations where there was a
large discrepancy right so essentially
for a good a good purchase yeah you're
looking to buy a dollar for 15 cents or
for 50 cents now here's the problem
as Benjamin Graham uh family said
famously said in the short run the
market is a voting machine but in the
long run it's a weighing machine that
long run we never truly know how and why
it happens but mysteriously uh
eventually in time uh companies will
trade at their intrinsic value and what
often happens is they'll overshoot their
intrinsic value or their undershoot
their intrinsic value right now this
idea because the short term is trying to
estimate that with within parameters
there they're indeterminate that's right
so as you stretch the arrow of time you
find that the kind of volatility that
you see in the short run
um somewhat disappears but but there's a
problem here because there's nothing
guaranteeing that the share of stock
which is basically a security it's a
claim especially for a minority owner
with no rights to just take control of
the business shut it down and cash out
the intrinsic value there's there's not
necessarily a um
a forcing mechanism uh that would that
would cause a share to uh to appreciate
your intrinsic value and and and
oftentimes uh or as would be uh believed
in modern economic theory the market is
so efficient that if if investors decide
that a share of stock should trade below
intrinsic value there's a reason for it
the Market's sensing something in the
future uh whether it's um you know there
are hypotheses in some sense correct me
if I'm wrong that that value investing
of that sort is in some way impossible
to do consistently consistently that
would be the efficient market hypothesis
right that all all actionable
information is in some sense already
priced into this stock and then the
hypothesis would be that even people who
routinely outperform the market are
doing that not because of any of their
intrinsic wisdom but because they
they're statistical outliers they've got
lucky in some statistical sense and
sometimes even consistently or the
corollary that they'll tout is uh that
those people are just providing
liquidity at certain moments that's kind
of the the newer way of arguing it but
that that position is just plain wrong I
mean I I wouldn't be where I am today if
it were true well the problem I had with
that position is that
if that's true it sort of invalidates
the idea that intelligence is useful
because the world is about as
unpredictable as the stock market and
yet we seem to be able to use our
intelligence to negotiate through it and
so I have some what would you say
um
uh uh Sympathy For The Proposition that
an intelligent analyst might be able to
get an edge on the other one on the on
the perturbations of the market anyways
you did do that and I you were quite
successful and what do you think made
you successful and you've continued to
be successful financially and in other
ways but what what do you think it was
that you brought to the problem
especially at such an early age that
enable you to be successful and what did
you learn by actually going to the mines
and and so forth well we're not at the
mines yes okay so this would be me just
basically uh picking stocks in a vanilla
way both long and short but employing
this method which I definitely
internalized you know at a very young
age I you know would meet Warren Buffett
and write him letters and have lunch
with him and things like that
um there was nothing wrong with the
method in fact I think the method is the
only way to outperform the market over
time and that's why all the great
investors are generally value investors
for the last 15 years or so 10 years or
so uh value investing has gone out of
Vogue um but all of those investors are
now making a comeback many of which have
produced really positive results in the
last year in 2022 so if you're going to
try and um generate Alpha as it's called
in hedge fund parlons
um you you need to be a value investor
in my opinion an elf is the differential
between the actual price and the assumed
its own value our performance over the
index so if the essence oh sure I had
that wrong yeah it's over performance
over the index that's the average
performance of the of the market that's
right so so you need to prove that
you're able to generate a return that a
monkey throwing darts can't generate uh
because you know there's the famous
experiment where they had a monkey
throwing darts at various stocks and he
basically produced the same right but
the idea is that you can't beat random
samples that's right yes Fooled by
Randomness
um so no there's nothing wrong with
value investing uh but but for me
um I think it reached a point where it
was no longer
um satisfying intellectually to just sit
there and cons analyze businesses
um abstract abstractly although I did
enjoy learning about different
Industries and that's another very
important thing you know value investors
need to be versatile enough to learn
about the economy itself and one of the
issues I had with the method
intellectually or the school of value
investing intellectually and some of the
mentors that I had was they they
genuinely believed that they didn't need
to care about the economy at all their
job was just to look at individual
stocks and construct a portfolio of
individuals there's a detailed focal
knowledge yeah and they used to there
used to be these outages in the
community all the time I remember even
as a young
young kid you know that nobody can
understand macroeconomics you know the
the that stuff is is just a Fool's
errand and there you know you can't
actually
um but but importantly you can't
actually value a commodity because a
commodity has no balance sheet and um
they were kind of starting how do you
distinguish a commodity from a stock or
another financial
asset well commodity is something that's
physical so uh its possessor is using it
as an input
um so if you buy a wheat you know you're
you might buy it electronically then you
take delivery of it and you use it to
make flour to produce bread so we think
of those as raw materials yeah they're
natural resources that's right you're
not buying it to sell it onwards you're
buying it to consume it uh whereas so
it's an input into another process that
generates value from those from those
initials that's right in fact it's the
fundamental input as I'm sure we'll get
into a stock is is basically
um a contract uh you know a a note a
piece of paper that says that you're
entitled to a share of a corporation and
Corporation themselves are these
interesting entities which are you know
relatively new in the history of of
humanity joint stock companies um the
idea before that was that you would
normally create a partnership pool
Capital than when you died your other
partners would have to buy you out but
with stocks you've created these
entities that essentially live on
forever with just the shares Changing
Hands
um right a more abstract form of
ownership but what that allows it to be
more distributed allows risk to be more
distributed that's right Zoom allows
people to diversify more easily that's
right but what what that achieves is a
kind of Illusion where once a stock is
traded on a public exchange and it has
um shares slushing around every single
day
investors begin to impart a sense of
timelessness uh or um entropy resistance
to a share of stock right like it's a
thing yeah you can't conceive that Apple
will not be around in 100 years right
well but it turns into our psychology
very interestingly because if you plot a
stock and you see it going up if you see
if you see a physical entity going up
yeah it's still moving at a pretty
decent rate you assume it's going to
continue to go up it's very difficult to
shake that but when you're looking at a
star chart because you have this
built-in embodied proclivity to assume
things like inertia it's going down very
rapidly and things going down rapidly
tend to go down rapidly to continue that
and there's no reason really to assume
that that's the case at all with the
stock because well if you could then you
could predict the stock and then of
course you could make a lot of money so
but there's actually an even greater
problem which is a historical fact that
um if you stretch time none of these
stocks ever survive so uh when they hit
zero at some point well they actually
disappear they go bankrupt or they get
reorganized and um so when Charles Dow
uh who worked at the Wall Street Journal
um or sorry at the Dow Jones company in
the 19th century um formulated the
initial Dow index of 30 companies it's
the same Dow index you have today right
index is the same however there is not
one uh constituent I think U.S steel the
U.S still is no longer in the Dow yeah
there's not one constituent in the Dow
today from 130 years right so you're
trying to measure something that's
caught you're trying to measure that's
right
whose constituent elements are
transforming constantly that's right but
you're but the double illusion there is
that the index value itself
um becomes uh an an idea and um an
object right you know it becomes a
security in and of itself
um so so people like always I mean you
know some of the greatest economic
thinkers uh Nobel laureates uh will make
this error uh but the whole industry
makes this error and what they do is
they'll say
um the the value of the index has gone
up this much over this many years uh but
the problem is that the index from 100
years ago was an entirely different
group of stocks and every time you need
to get rid of some stocks
um there's costs associated with it with
it and uh many times um is there can you
make an index that's large enough so
that you overcome that problem
statistically no because I suppose it
would take just longer for it to
transform entirely if it had more
entities and I know most corporate
entities don't last that long even if
they're highly successful right that's
about that's it's about 30 or 40 years
yeah right right and that turnover is
probably increasing and that's a good
thing as far as capitalism is concerned
because you know there's there's
creative destruction and failure is and
is an integral component of capitalism
but going back to the switch
um
there was nothing wrong with value
investing it was fine but there was a
kind of intellectual
I became a little disinterested in the
whole the whole way of going about it
and I had this problem that uh you were
making money doing it yes how old were
you when you became financially
independent I'd say early 20s early 20s
okay so so despite the fact that you
were making money something was pulling
you to investigate something different
yeah yeah and did you know at that point
what it was I mean was it just a
diminishment of your interest or could
you see interest in something specific
otherwise making itself manifest I
actually do remember one of the things
it was it was it was me
um trying to purchase property and um
bidding on a few properties and learning
about the real estate market and seeing
the price of houses change nominally
and at some point like asking myself the
question what exactly is driving the
price of the house up I know it drives
us the price of a stock up I know that
ultimately
um stock is a share of a business which
generates income but what exactly is a
house like why is a house worth more
today versus yesterday and I remember
thinking like very clearly like wouldn't
the house actually be decaying over time
wouldn't it cost money to upkeep the
house
um and and so that was when I realized
that value investing was insufficient
for understanding economics and that was
what I was really interested in was
trying to answer certain questions I had
about how the economy Works in and of
itself and
um and I also uh had this real problem
that Commodities Were Somehow excluded
from the value investing method and so I
started learning a lot about Commodities
and I I was just fascinated with you
know the periodic table and the fact
that so it sounds like to some degree
you were starting to become interested
in basic like really basic philosophical
Notions of value per se right remember
when I was a kid 17 or so I read this
book uh Zen and the Art of Motorcycle oh
yes wonderful great book yeah well it's
really an investigation he called it an
investigation into quality right into
what what what is it that makes
something of higher quality than another
which is really an investigation into
value and yes my career was driven in
large part by an investigation into
value and that might be maybe why our
interests parallel to some degree
because you were interested in value
very practically but then you also
became interested in the idea of value
like abstractly what constitutes value
why does it dynamically shift and change
what drives that is that merely a
consequence of human interaction I mean
that's that's something that persik
investigated in in the Art of Motorcycle
Maintenance right because we could
assume that value is no more than what
we say it is right it's merely a matter
of human agreement but but the fact that
there are commodities for example this
is something your word points to
indicates that while it's not merely a
matter of human agreement because
there's something basic about basic
Commodities right there there are some
things that we that we cannot do
anything at all without and I suppose
water would be the most basic of
Commodities or air in that in that
particular case so there's some
fundamental relationship between human
subjectivity and the objective structure
of the world and so maybe that's alert
you like lurking at you underneath I
think that's that's exactly what it is I
would just change I I don't love the
word value I would say I was searching
for truth and I think that there was
always this inherent uh intuition that
there is objective truth and what I
couldn't reconcile even even in economic
analysis absolutely economics is
reflecting The Real World
um and so my issue I think was that the
Commodities were objectively true you
know these were real entities that were
at the heart of all human activity and
cooperation but then when it came to the
sort of sophisticated financial analysis
commodity trading was seen as a kind of
um uh you know inferior art form you
know the people in the midwest did that
in the Futures Market
um the real intelligent people were were
hedge fund managers in New York City
what do you think accounted for the
Prejudice so to speak the elitist
prejudice against commodity trading
because you'd assume that if the goal
was
to understand and to make money and
maybe with the latter primary that why
would there be any elitism in
relationship to the to the methods of
trading was the idea that in some
somehow it was simpler to analyze the
Commodities markets you think that would
make it more attractive though well the
fact is it's not simpler because if if
it were um you know you would have
incredible investors in that space right
but they're a very small group of
investors that have done well primarily
building and operating mines
um but in terms of trading the
Commodities themselves there aren't
there's maybe a handful of good
investors
um no it actually has to do with with
it's a mirror reflection of of the state
of our society and our economy so our
economy became more abstract more
service oriented and the velocity of
activity
um you know was was increasing the tenor
of of activity you know if you just take
a a you know basic example of how
publicly traded companies you know used
to report their financials once a year
now they're being forced to report every
90 days now they're making projections
every 90 days to what they're going to
report in 90 days
um so we're building an abstraction
hierarchy on top of the commodity base
yes and the and and status as an analyst
seems to depend on your operation at the
upper levels of the abstract I wonder if
that's partly well that's where you're
going to make money too so so you're
going to make money in all of these
Frontier so-called Industries
um whether they're in stem or whether
they're in um you know High Finance you
know Financial engineering derivatives
complicated things right so there's a
novelty there's a novelty contribution
there is that the Commodities trading
that's an ancient business yeah that's
that's a physical physical business
physical clearing so remember the issue
with the stock is you buy it and you
never know if the stock will be weighed
Benjamin Graham claims that it does over
time
um but as I said it might it and it does
over time but you never know exactly
when physical markets are entirely
different right well if they buy Here
apart pork belly's future and you don't
trade it in eventually you get the pork
belly exactly and once you get the pork
belly the transactions close right you
no longer own anything if you want to
buy another pork belly future you have
to decide what month and delivery you
want so that the farmer who's producing
it will sell into that contract and
settle the trade so so the fact that you
have
um full clearing and settlement in
physical Commodities is very interesting
from a financial lens because it means
that you always have that objective
Arbiter of Truth you know you can't just
defer things indefinitely and I think
that also attracted me very much
um to the industry but basically what I
did was a lot of fundamental corrective
in some sense yes right a fundamental
reminder of your of your union with an
underlying structure that isn't
arbitrarily in some sense isn't
arbitrarily ordered by human beings
that's right that's right and I think
that um for me I was trying to express
what I had learned in value investing
through the world of Commodities and so
this brings us back to the mining
chapter what I ultimately estimated was
that if you take a mine in a stable
geopolitical jurisdiction so say in
Canada or in the United States or in
Europe you know depending where in
Europe
um
and the mine had already uh been
geologically explored and and thus there
was an ore body which was delineated in
other words we've drilled holes into the
ground we know what exists Underground
and you bought that mind but you didn't
actually mine you you just bought the
land
um what you were essentially doing was
buying a call option on future weight of
Commodities in the future which you
could always extract from the ground
okay explain that a bit call option so
you're leaving it like like it's a bag
yeah it's a vault in the ground you're
betting that the future value will be
higher than the present value otherwise
you'd mind now that's right right
there's a reason why you don't want to
mine now and and the reason is that
you're estimating that there's going to
be more money floating around and so the
price of the commodity will rise over
time but you're also betting that the
cost of extracting the commodity will
not rise as fast or decline that's right
well they don't normally decline they
rise with inflation
um okay just like everything else
because you've got basically three
inputs in mining any commodity like you
have three inputs in doing anything in
the economy which is energy labor and
time
um and and labor you know in inflate
always Rises and energy always Rises and
you know when you actually have
inflation you have to raise interest
rates then you're basically increasing
the cost of time as well the price of
time
um but that was my idea you know it was
it was it was a novel idea there were a
few people that had done it successfully
um that I looked up to but I had the
idea of kind of building an aggregation
of these deposits and so I I raised
money from some investors I cashed out
some of my own money and I did that and
I chose a few Commodities that I thought
would be integral to society I was
trying to make a prediction over the
over my lifetime and I used to say you
know to my investors that I'm trying to
imagine you know like right before I die
which Commodities are still going to be
the ones that are most important and so
I I chose
um copper which is one of the most
important metals that we have in the
periodic table it's antimicrobial it
conducts energy
um it's it's just a a fascinating metal
uh there's no end to the to the
mysteries of copper uh I chose silver
which is the most reflective of metals
and is also an incredible uh conductor
of energy and antimicrobial
um and I chose zinc which has medicinal
properties and is used in in a variety
of applications right so the periodic
table just so that everyone is following
this is the layout of the structure of
the elements of the of the cosmos that's
right right and and so if you decompose
material structures to their most
fundamental elements above the uh like
say subatomic levels right then you end
up with about 116 fundamental elements
the top 15 or so mostly or man-made
that's right so there's a very finite
set of elements and all the elements
have quite spectacularly different
properties and right and that intrinsic
to their nature right right which is
which is very important because there's
really nothing else like that everything
else reduces back to these elements
these material constituents of reality
essentially they're like the the
alphabet of reality in some sense yes
yes
um yeah except that human beings didn't
invent them yeah I used to say they're
like Legos you know they're pre-given
Legos and then you can rearrange them
um and and do more than just rearrange
them but essentially what you're doing
is you're rearranging them
um and and so so it was yes silver
copper uh zinc uh iron ore uh which was
a lot more interesting back when I was
doing it these days it's it's less
interesting as we're not building as
many things but obviously iron ore is an
input uh for steel uh or any kind of um
you know metal production and then why
did you why did you focus on Metals
particularly well actually uh there was
a flaw in my thinking that was only
corrected uh in the last six years
um I had uh thought always in terms of
longevity stretching time you know how
can I buy as much time as possible and
my problem with the soft Commodities are
livestock
um was that I was thinking that uh you
know their their
they diminish faster right so you're
looking for permanence that's right so
you Associated that with Metals
absolutely because you know if I have a
you know 100 tons of wheat I have to
store it somewhere and it's deeply
decaying it that's right and even oil if
I try to store it you know is
evaporating at two or three percent a
year so you have to store it in Salt
caverns and inject water and then that
costs loads of money
um but but with Metals you know you mine
them once especially the precious metal
the pressure ones are the most unique
ones
um but you mine them once and what's
cool about owning the the mines is is
they're in the ground so they're not
oxidizing yet you know it's only when
you get them out of the ground they
start to oxidize right so they don't
Decay more further than they have
already that's right and and so that's
that was uh the general idea
um and so I did that for a few years and
I learned so much about
um geology and the natural world and I
was just shocked to see that there were
these intrinsic relationships not not
all only in the natural attributes that
each of these elements possessed but in
terms of the relationships of the
natural attributes to the other elements
so in other words
um you know there's a there's a
important metric called crustal
abundance and that's basically the the
average rate at which an element exists
in the Earth's crust and it's obviously
an imperfect a standard of data because
you might go in your backyard and drill
a hole and you will not find uh that
that that
um you know material right right it's
not uniform it's not uniformly however
when you're talking about ore bodies
something that is actually being mined
for the sake of extracting the resource
that is generally the average and you
can you can infer absolutely and measure
something like comparative Rarity
absolutely as a consequence even if it
isn't homogenously distributed so one of
the features of the periodic table of
the elements is that all the elements
are not equally distributed that's right
there's an intrinsic
that's right but actually it turns out
that they are all relatively equally
distributed uh you know on an on a
continent or Nation basis you know
almost at a country level I mean
Geographic territory is large enough
yeah and this is important for later
when we get into the notion of scarcity
and and and uh you know people always
always have qualms with you know but
isn't it fair it's not fair that one
country has this or it turns out that
pretty much every country has what they
need uh in terms of the important
elements um and if they don't they have
something else that they can exchange
for the important elements
um but so I I learned a lot about that
uh world and was fascinated by it and
spent quite a bit of time with
geologists
um yeah well you told me a funny story
last night yeah we're talking about a
Nobel Laureate in economics that you had
talked with
who was convinced that the value of
money was uh not attached in any
fundamental sense to the structures of
the real world in the manner that you
claim it is and you told me that he
didn't know that there was genuine
natural variation in in Crystal
abundance of different Metals that's
right so yeah yeah so so this was a
Nobel Laureate who said uh and it is
recorded somewhere
um that the reason that copper uh is
valued at X and gold is valued at Y is
just subjective you know people have
decided to Value Copper at this level
and gold at that level and I responded
by saying but don't you think it's a bit
mysterious that the the price of copper
reflects the same crustal abundance of
copper in other words copper is 5 000
times more abundant than gold in the
earth's crusts and if you look at the
price of copper per ton in the market
it's roughly 5 000 times right right
right right well this is a key goal
sorry gold is five thousand times more
expensive right well this is a key point
right because that was part of what
clued you and into the to the idea that
value per se including Financial value
was not merely something that was
subjectively determined that it also
bore a relationship to something like
abundance and ease of access now there's
an interaction between the two but the
the fact of that abundance in your
hypothesis places an intrinsic
constraint on the parameters within
which pricing might vary and as an uh is
it what even data point that that should
usually be taken into account both
practically and conceptually and it's
important here because partly what we're
trying to understand is what is the
relationship between human systems of
value that would be pricing and the
actual natural world as such and that's
like a that's like a an investigation
into the relationship between brute
empirical reality and the domain of
philosophical value right so it's
crucial it's a crucial issue and and
practically it would be well it might
help you invest better and then you'd
know what to do with your money but it's
also crucial conceptually and so okay so
now you you also said to me at one point
that there is a rough equivalence in the
ratio of the value of metals to one
another across time in relationship to
the relative abundance and so with
silver you see the same thing with
silver in relationship to Gold that you
see with copper in relationship to Gold
Silver's rarer than copper yeah we we
never wake up one morning and see that
an asteroid really did hit and these
relationships were appended entirely we
never really see that
um you know all of a sudden uh uh you
know zinc becomes the rarest element you
know or or aluminum becomes the rarest
element we go back in history and what
we see is that
um something like gold was always
understood for its intrinsic natural
attributes but also as being extremely
rare and that there are certain things
that are more abundant than gold and yet
uh closer to gold and Rarity than they
are to Something Like Oxygen um so so I
see that as a kind of natural order a
natural right right well yeah it's a
limit that there's a natural reason why
people for example gravitated towards
gold and silver and bronze often but
that's causal essentially as Hallmarks
of monetary value right so they were
that that was an attempt an attempt what
would you say practical and conceptual
to tie the system of abstract value to
some underlying natural phenomena to
keep the value system pegged to the
structure of the world I I would say it
a little different I would say that
there was no notion of abstract value
that basically you would have these
different Commodities that were produced
for their utility for their usefulness
and as they were being produced rather
than having a coincidence of wants or
barter or some kind of inefficient
system uh people recognize that each one
of these Commodities were a common
measure and
of the other ones right in other words I
can trade you two bushels of corn for
one gram of copper and then and that
wasn't an abstraction that was an actual
it's about that was an even trade of
intrinsic value it's it's literally a
balance scale that's weighing the weight
of these two different Commodities and
then eventually so that's not precisely
only social contract dependent no it's
not this is this is basically just uh I
would say it's metabolism metabolization
at some point it's it's you have some
energy that I need right and I'm going
to give you something that you need
um and we're basically helping each
other we're nourishing each other's
Souls
um but but the thing is that at some
point one of these things begins to be
the de facto measure for all the other
things and so that is what you see with
metallic money whether it's gold or
silver or bronze or even iron in some
some uh civilizations but it was
important to remember that every
civilization that deserves the name
civilization in the historical record
would have had a metal as money and
would have had a monetary unit which had
a weight rather than some abstract
nominal value like a dollar or five
dollars it would have been something
like a pound so you know a pound in this
country Sterling means silver a pound is
a weight of silver that's what the pound
would have been
um so so I was figuring all of this out
um
and it actually led me to a a real
appreciation of the Exemplar qualities
of this one element which was gold
[Music]
with the start of the New Year upon us
what better time than now to start
building a habit of Prayer just like
physical exercise daily spiritual
exercise is critical to your well-being
especially in a world where attacks on
faith and religion are happening all
around us every day
hallow the number one Christian Prayer
app in the U.S and the number one
Catholic app in the world helps you
maintain a daily prayer routine
it's filled with studies meditations and
Reflections including the number one
Christian podcast the Bible in a year
download the app for free at hallow.com
Jordan you can set prayer reminders
invite others to pray with you and track
your progress along the way
make this year your year for spiritual
growth and peace
get an exclusive three-month free trial
at hollow.com Jordan that's hallow.com
Jordan
so so when you were analyzing Minds how
did you learn which Minds to invest in
and then let's go that concrete route
first and then back to the abstract what
did you learn about value investing in
relationship to Minds in particular and
then how did that inform your decision
to focus more particularly on gold well
actually I did something quite quite
novel even in regards to that I figured
that as long as the Mind truly had the
uh the material wealth embodied in the
mind because it was drilled out and it
was audited and it was basically tested
through a public disclosure file uh
that's that has to go through a
Securities Commission or something like
that
I it was worth owning that mine even if
it wasn't necessarily clear how you
would get that mind permitted and so I
was buying Minds that um you know
some people might say would have a
difficult time of being permitted and I
felt that over time the communities
would work these things out as the as
the value of the of the world intrinsic
values
what perspective to begin with yes
because your notion there is that
because forensic value yes the market
which would be the regulatory
environment some senses which Converge
on appreciation of the value and you can
see that now in the UK where you're
burning coal again exactly right that
would be a perfect example so so someone
like me I never invested in Coal but
someone like me might have purchased a
coal mine six years ago uh for pittance
you know because people told them this
will never be permanent again right and
then but it's cold yes exactly you can
burn it yeah and I would argue that with
coal you know the argument isn't so
clear because you don't necessarily it
you know coal is a great source of
energy of course in terms of its energy
density and in terms of the UK having a
lot of coal nearby
um too yeah but with Metals it's it's
easier to make that estimation you know
so you just give you a very basic
example if if the world truly wants to
Electrify uh the global Fleet of of cars
um we basically don't really have enough
copper to do that based on what we know
today the reserves the economic reserves
so at the very least we're going to be
uh taking down a lot of mountains uh
around the world if we want to get just
the amount of copper that we're
estimating you know to sell 100 million
cars a year
um and the same is true of something
like nickel which is we can just solve
that by forbidding people to have cars
well that's that seems like what might
happen
um but with nickel it's even easier and
and with gold it's it's the easiest
easiest in what way in terms of you're
always at a shortage of gold it's the
hardest thing to get out of the ground
um and it just keeps getting harder and
harder and harder so there's this
difficulty curve uh it's almost like is
it harder than uranium is it harder than
the even though yeah uranium is quite
abundant actually the thing about
uranium is it needs to be enriched into
u208 or whatever YouTube and so so
that's the real cost in it it's not the
I mean there's quite a bit of uranium
around the world and it's Crystal
abundance is is you know it's not not
special uh at all
um uh you know why is gold particularly
rare
that's a why question so we know we will
never know I mean it's it's you there
are a theoretic theoretical physicists
that um postulate about Neutron Starks
colliding and things like that but I
don't think we know these the answers to
these questions I think it's a it's a
mystery why it is that we have this
pre-given Set of Legos yeah okay and and
they seem to be uh in use uh since time
immemorial and in my book there's
appendices where I try and identify sort
of the beginning of of the use you know
it's kind of like when someone asks you
when was the wheel invented when was the
plow invented when was writing I don't
think we know because because in the
extant text that we have the oldest we
already see a society uh you know
pregnant with this activity right so so
we see uh in museums and in um
archaeological discoveries just not only
this this knowledge of of the elements
the metals but we see the Techni the
ability to craft wonderful objects from
these from these elements that have kind
of moral significance
um and so I think when you take a step
back which was what was happening to me
in my 20s uh and you look at the natural
world with a sense of wonder in terms of
of my biographical Arc I was starting to
come back to the natural world you know
I was starting to see that you know the
theoretical physics and and those
explanations of reality weren't going to
satisfy my desire about the truth but
the natural world was there was still
that sense of wonder that just like that
question you asked that I can't answer I
don't know why gold is the way it is
it's just a pre-given reality
um and so I you know became quite
fascinated with gold and also invested
in gold mines and at this point I moved
to Canada to Toronto where you're from
because that was kind of the mecca of
Mind Finance you know Toronto is the
world's most important Financial market
for Mining and unlike um in the United
States where the great majority of
companies at least before the last crash
uh are service industry companies in
Canada the great majority are real
mining companies and all the best
engineers and geologists and banks that
know how to deal these companies are
based in Canada so I learned a lot about
that I invested in it and at some point
I made the mistake of trying to mine the
Gold
because I felt like some of the mines
were ready to go or I invested in some
companies that had mines that they had
developed and were ready to mine and
that was when I realized how hard it was
to actually make a profit Mining and I I
yearned for the days of value investing
that my mentors used to tell me about
um
and it hit me one day just seeing these
continued losses and unexpected you know
vagaries of Nature and all of a sudden
something just goes terribly wrong you
weren't predicting all of a sudden
there's a flood right and I realized you
know you're actually better off just
buying the gold
and then holding on to it uh or using it
then trying to get it out of the ground
it's cheaper if you if you consider all
of the costs it's probably cheaper to do
it that way and
this was also interlaced with um me
shifting my intellectual area of focus
from you know Finance to economics and
monetary history and I realized that a
lot of the questions I had about the
inner workings of the economy centered
on the question of what is money uh how
do we cooperate what makes that
cooperation sustainable and uh you know
no surprise here in terms of the arc it
became clear to me that the money had to
be rooted in nature and it had to be one
of these right now that puts you at odds
with most modern economists and value
investors okay so why modern economists
and then why value investors as well
well the basically the the whole you
know the word economics economic
economical or economia you know in
Aristotle's politics it means household
management so it was something that was
rooted in the in the family in the land
in the house and over the course of you
know 2 000 years
um around the 19th century uh the whole
study of Economics becomes denaturalized
um you know with with people like mill
saying that you know the the whole
purpose of our activities to conquer
nature and uh figures such as Stanley G
Vons who who began to postulate that you
know every exchange of goods and
services is just a ratio of two numbers
uh there's no limit to human desires
um and so what happens in economics is a
kind of mathematization of Economics you
know it becomes the study of the
abstract over the study of the real and
economics you know for most of its
history was a was a branch of natural
philosophy but now it kind of becomes a
social science or a you know a
exactly it's exactly that and um you
know decoupling because I mean the the
whole post-modern revolution in some
sense decoupled meaning again in the
same way from the world right meaning is
just an arbitrary social construction
just like identity it's only encoded in
the relationship between Concepts that's
right same it's exactly the same idea
operating in a different in a different
sphere well perhaps it was the economic
turn that also influenced a lot of that
and I think when I look at Austrian
economics for example which is very
popular and it's you know loaded with
this language of subjectivism
um from from that philosophical term
that takes place uh I I definitely think
the seeds were planted with the
denaturalization of the economy but the
economy was always viewed I mean there's
nothing new in my book there's uh some
contributions
um and perhaps a reminder rediscovery
there's some perhaps some minor
rediscoveries but really it's it's a
reminder of what we always thought about
the economy and what we always thought
was that if you were even going to use
the word wealth uh you were referring to
something physical and something
material and the reason for that is that
if You observe reality objectively
um the only place where you see growth
is is in that physical world of you know
either biology through reproduction or
when you plant one seed in the spring
and you reap two uh in the fall and and
and so you're only really you're an
interesting thinker in that regard
because I mean you have a very
materialist view of value but you also
have a philosophy that that extends into
a Theology and you also believe that
there is such a thing as spiritual
wealth right and I I suppose in some
sense the idea of spiritual wealth is
also an abstraction of the idea of
wealth and and how do you conceptualize
the relationship we haven't talked about
this at all before how do you
conceptualize the relationship between
spiritual wealth that's abstracted say
given that it's spiritual and the
material wealth that has to do with the
actual tan tangible like grip on on
physical substances
well if you believe in God then you
believe that the world was created and
if the world is created
um then you know ipso facts facto the
natural order itself is imbued with with
the order in the natural order the
regularity and the vagaries they're
imbued with us with a sense of morality
so you can't separate in the natural law
itself encompasses both both the moral
right realities but also the right okay
so for those who are listening I'm so so
sorry about that what that means is that
the material world's a lot more
spiritual than we right conceived well
well one of the ways you you can think
about that practically because it sounds
like a strange abstraction is that if
you and I decide that we're going to do
a joint venture in relationship to
Mining and we don't treat each other
fairly and honestly the probability that
our mining Endeavor is going to be
successful is pretty much zero yeah
because we're going to run into so many
entanglements over time that it's going
to make the Practical operations
impossible and so you might say that in
order to come to some concordant grip
with the vagaries of the natural world
there's an ethic you have to manifest
and that seems to that seems to be part
and parcel of your sense too that to to
operate morally also means to align
yourself with the proper rhythms of
Nature and to pay attention to the
proper ratios of scarcity and to take
into account the limits that the natural
world
they're not so much limits they're
principles of the natural world that you
have to abide by in order to play a
productive game and then you'd say
there's a concordance between that
bottom-up morality which is practical
and the top-down morality which is more
spiritual and Abstract the the the term
uh in the uh 18th century it was used by
uh French economy it's a term that now
has come to dominate the libertarian uh
economic thinkers of the day was
meant let nature take its course and so
you don't want to do anything that
prevents nature or inhibits nature you
don't want to Dam up the river you don't
want to manipulate the material reality
in this alchemical or Gnostic way you
want to let nature take its course just
like you want so there's a Harmony there
that's right and so so you see nature as
a gift you see the wealth that arises
from nature as a gift and you see any
kind of growth as being correlated to
the material real realities and the
first thing that that arises from that
kind of a world view which again was was
first nature it was a first principle of
Economics until this denaturalization
is the importance of the farmer
you know a natural economy
is predicated on the activity of the
farm well then that would be another
potential reason why the this
denaturalization occurred I mean what
what how in 1880 what 90 percent of
people were basically employed on the
farm and now it's like three percent
yeah and so you could imagine that
there'd be uh running away from the
boundaries of nature that parallels
urbanization and and because it's an
abstraction process it's a real sense
absolutely but um
you know the the importance of the
farmer is is key and and remember when I
said earlier when you asked why didn't
you invest in some of the soft
Commodities or I had missed this in in
my 20s I I only rediscovered this in the
last few years where I myself returned
to my roots and and began farming again
um see
what I missed was that the land that the
farmer is tending to
coupled with the farmer's wisdom the
farmer's toil the farmer's ability to
respond to failure and change uh to the
Caprices of of nature
um that that coupled with the land
produces a kind of yield a kind of
return which over time does multiply
so if you have a flock of sheep and you
have a hundred sheep well you know
you're usually gonna get two and a half
sheep per annum for each uh pregnant uh
sheep that you have and so you will
produce more than you had at the
beginning of the year and it just
becomes a function of how many sheep you
can fit per acre of land to feed them
but the the excess sheep that you're
producing which you sell allow you to
make allows you to purchase more land
which allows you to then expand your
farming activity and so livestock it
literally means
um you know a Capital stock of of
biological uh organisms that are
reproducing and and you know it's not
exactly the same with crops
um but what is true of crops is that the
land that you have and the work that
you're doing is going to guarantee you a
a a a kind of material abundance from
which you can at least sustain yourself
but in what most likely cases you'll
have a surplus which you can then trade
on for the things that you don't produce
and again there's nothing new in terms
of of my ideas in the book here
um up until jivon's uh the economy was
always viewed to be broken into two
classes the productive class and the
unproductive class uh the unproductive
class were generally called The Artisans
you know they even had a nice name it
was never an issue of like mutual
hostility or Elite versus you know
inferior aristocracy it was just about
there are people that work with nature
to produce these physical things which
then get traded on to this other group
of people that use those things they
improve them uh they change them they
consume them but at the end of the year
those productive people have to go back
and negotiate with nature whilst the
other group of people has that option
they can either revert back to that
activity or they can wait and hope that
the service they're going to render uh
and this includes manufacturing you know
any any anything that requires the input
from the land uh would be in the second
category and so in my book I call it the
real economy versus the service economy
so so okay so the real economy the more
you're in the real economy the more
you're dealing directly with non-human
nature that's right right and so the and
the the last year dealing with non-human
nature so the more your financial
transactions are only dependent on
social relations the more you're in the
secondary economy and the certain
economy and so part of your hypothesis
in some sense is even though there is a
disconnect
between
the the real economy and the service
economy that grows with time as more and
more people are in the service economy
if the service economy doesn't bear the
mark of the relationship with the
underlying natural order it's going to
become part of the ways that are that
are that are eventually unsustainable
and counterproductive well then it's
just parasitic so so it's it's demanding
it's dominating a Class A group of
people right let's provide that might
also be exhausting them well and also
and exhausting the natural react well
because it's not heating the signals as
well yeah but that's a whole a whole
nother thing I mean I deal with that
briefly in the book you know for me what
was important was just to see that
the the activity every exchange of goods
and services whether it's taking place
at the real economy or at the service
economy
ultimately needed to be measured in the
same way that the farmer's activity is
measured that the miners activities
measured that the coal miner or oil rig
worker
this activity is measured and that that
measure is not a human construct that
it's part of that natural order that the
measure itself you thought that was
embodied or still think that that was
embodied in some real sense in metal and
best embodied in Gold it's actually
embodied in anything that's natural
right sorry I mean commodity yeah it can
it can it can even theoretically be
embodied in a rock
but the thing that it's going to be
embodied best in is going to have two or
three qualities
first it has to outlast time it has to
be something that retains its material
existence without change over time right
that makes it a reliable Storehouse of
value or reliable measure
that never changes it's an inch that's
always an inch so a gram of gold will
always constant it's a constant right
the other thing that it has to have is
it has to have a sense of difficulty and
if possible that's like proof of work in
Bitcoin well we all know that you know
Satoshi was a mirroring
um you know the process of of gold
mining of course with Bitcoin there's
forgibly scarce proof of work bits with
mining you have the physical gold that
you get out of the ground
um which you can then pass on to anyone
um
so so that difficulty though is not just
how rare something is uh it also has to
do with what are the attributes of the
thing
um and so if you lay them out you'll
find that because these Commodities are
a common measure and a reward for each
other that you can have one commodity
act as a proxy for another okay now so
it's sort of like the idea of an essence
of a essence of commodity itself that's
right you'd say that gold is the essence
of the idea of commodity itself that's
that's yes exactly and and and it
doesn't mean that um gold is more
important you know obviously if you're
stuck in a room and you have better
measure yes so if you're stuck in a room
and you've got a glass of water it's a
famous Diamond Water Paradox but I'll
use gold and you've got loads of gold
and you know you're locked in the room
uh you know you're obviously going to
choose the water over the gold but
that's not how a society that advances
from subsistence where it's just
producing the things it needs which then
consumes to post subsistence where
there's a market economy that is
developed where there's different people
engage in different specialized scale
skills and where essentially the goods
and services are exchanged in that
post-subsistence Society at that point
everything is exchanged for everything
else there's very few people emblem of
that exchangeability yeah and and the
point is that in that Society
people still have the right and the
option to revert back to subsistence
this is another thing that that no
modern Economist really understands is
there's always the option to pull out of
the economy and go back to the land you
know it happens on YouTube you can see
it's quite trendy with um it's a lot
harder than people think generally but
it's a lot harder but it's more
rewarding you know and and I think a lot
of people talk about that um
you know that infused morality that
comes comes with that process but the
point is that you know you may hate gold
uh because it symbolizes something but
you can't dispute the natural properties
of gold and so you know one of the
things that really troubles me is um
when I see people automatically label
gold as some kind of a right-wing
conservative thing and um and I think
that's just so ridiculous I mean it's an
element on the periodic table
and and it's it's it's part of nature
itself you know it's it's a it's a
beautiful element that's used in art and
it's used in your cell phone and it's
used in you know so many applications
whether you're going out to space and
there's only one corrode for example
yeah and so you can't say that that gold
or any commodity belongs to a class or a
group of ideas what you can say
objectively and if you speak to any a
chemist or or a geologist they'll all
tell you this that there are just
exemplary properties to this element and
so as a result the the property of being
rare and outlasting everything else you
know the tomatoes will have to be
reproduced the Sheep are going to be
eaten and reproduced the oil is going to
be consumed for movement we have to
produce more oil the gold is produced
once and then it begins to serve as a
measure under reward for everything else
and how Universal was that among archaic
societies that gold was a standard of
value it's it's basically every single
Society you know you you go to
Mesopotamia and you look at how
Hammurabi you know is primarily silver
and Hammurabi you look at
um you know all of the the Hebrew Bible
you know I have an appendix where I go
through the Hebrew Bible and just the
amount of passages where
um you know the the Israelites
are
required by God in law to have you know
honest balance on a scales honest
measures
um you know obviously King Solomon
famously says um all things were made by
God according to number measure and
weight the weight is very important here
weight is not like number there there's
a distinction in kind between what
weight is and what a number is
um and so things definitely have to be
weighed and you know you there's there's
a many ways always means comparison of
one thing to another well I actually
think yeah and I think way is just
almost saying like justice you know it's
it's like what is this well we use the
scale as a measure of chocolate yes yeah
so you know there's there's examples of
uh of Abraham buying a field and
literally you know using the silver
earrings of Sarah to pay putting them on
the balance scales weighing them so
there's another misconception uh in
economics and economic history and
monetary history which is you know
parroted all the time is that somehow
gold coins were just used from the time
of King crisis in Lydia in you know 700
in the year 700 and that's not true
that's just when a king decided to
basically get into the business of you
know minting the money uh but but before
that people would just actually weigh
the metal and and they would just go
somewhere and say this is how much metal
I have I'm weighing it and in many cases
they might just not be weighing they may
not just be weighing metal they're
weighing you know other Commodities that
they have but the idea that you would
give someone something some kind of
product of your toil or render a service
and not get anything in in return you
know this is a a famous idea of David
Graber the late uh uh Anthropologist who
I I deal with in the book
um I I just don't think that's true I
think that that might be true in a
subsistent society where the bonds of
kinship uh and just a sense of altruism
to your neighbor
um you know are kind of familial bonds I
think that yeah but you forget like even
then like I've noticed in different
tracks I've made with people we'll be
discussing extremely weighty financial
matters and you think well this will
burn it in on your memory and then six
months later a dispute comes up and you
think well we all knew what we were
talking about six months ago but you
forget your memory itself decays exactly
you need a marker that's independent of
the transitoriness even of memory when
it's motivated by Goodwill that's right
and and that's I think what's really
interesting about jewelry and you know I
also have a jewelry brand which produces
24 karat gold jewelry and we sell it by
weight you know not not a coincidence
it's called Monet which is the ancient
Aramaic word for a weight of gold or
silver
um but one of the things that I I
learned in starting the jewelry brand
was just that the role of jewelry itself
and and the choice of precious elements
for jewelry expresses something that
essentially what you just said where
you're trying to wrap a moment in time
or memory in this case you know I am
betrothed you know I'm marrying you it
has to not Decay it has a portable it
has to be hidable that's right it has to
be memorable that's right has to attract
attention yes the glitteriness would be
part of that yes it's almost like you
know its purpose is to do this right
um and and it's a token you know that's
why we call it a token so so we're
wrapping some kind of event that's
fleeting because time is always moving
us forward
um now it's interesting in the case of
gold you have this Perfection of the
element which is it's it's
incommensurability with other elements
so the Alchemists regard gold as Noble
morally because it didn't make
promiscuously with other metals right
and you can you can deride that as a
kind of primordial Superstition but it's
not because part of the reason that gold
was admirable was because it's lack of
of of proclivity to alloy or to the road
makes it permanent and then in the case
of precious stones there's a there's a
Perfection to them which is the absolute
regulatory
regulation of their crystalline
structure
um and it's the fact of that regularity
that allows them to reflect light and
that idea that something precious
reflects light has a spiritual element
because you can say well that's what it
means to be illuminated is so because
you reflect light under those
circumstances so there's this weird
mythological parallel between the the
molec or the atomic structure let's say
of of both gold and of of precious
jewels that that that isn't just
arbitrary right it's got this it's got a
metaphorical reality that's overlaid on
top of its yes of its Physical Realm
it's almost like a semiotic claim yeah
yeah but yeah it's like you know it's
important just to stress though that the
gems are much different from elements
because they're compounds of elements
right oxides and things like that so
they're actually not as rare as people
think either diamonds are not that rare
and because they're basically a crystal
carbon you know you can also produce
them by compressing carbon
um but it is interesting to note that
you know Isaac Newton was obsessed with
Alchemy and um tried for I think almost
a decade to transmute other elements
into gold and it was when he finally
um recognized that this wasn't going to
be possible
that uh he was uh
made the master of the mint of the bank
of England in 1694 and one of his first
acts was
um establishing a gold standard
and so it's it's almost like he tried to
hack gold for so many and then failing
to and then give up and recognize you
know this is how I'm going to get create
monetary order out of the chaos of an
economy that doesn't have one so he
became convinced of the immutability of
gold and that made him a good candidate
for someone who was establishing the
foundations or in charge of what would
you say guarding the foundations of of
of the monetary system itself yeah
there's a curious passage in the Optics
I don't think I can recall it because I
read it many years ago but it's
something like in the beginning it's
clear that in the beginning God formed
all matter in such a way where it was
truly indestructible and then he says
something about gold shortly thereafter
but
um yeah I know I I think that that and
remember like Newton is someone that
appreciated the laws of nature helped
Advance Humanity's knowledge of those
laws in ways that are just unfathomable
today but he recognized that this was an
element that was exemplary and that
money needed to be something that was
physical rooted in nature
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new documentary logos and
literacy
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world
the pastor's home was the first school
and every morning it would begin with
singing the Christian faith is a singing
religion probably 80 percent of
scripture memorization today exists only
because of what is sung this is amazing
here we have a Gutenberg Bible printed
on the Press of Johann Goomba science
and religion are opposing forces in the
world but historically that has not been
the case now the book is available to
everyone from Shakespeare to modern
education and medicine and science to to
civilization itself it is the most
influential book in all of history and
hopefully people can walk away
with at least a sense of that
so prior to this conversation we've
talked about the advantages and
disadvantages of decoupling the monetary
system from this underlying the
underlying principles of or constraints
of reality and people who are like late
followers of Keynes have made the
proposition if I have it correct that
one of the advantages to bringing the
monetary system under only human control
is that you can inflate or deflate the
money supply to smooth out business
cycles and that would be the oscillation
between bust and boom that can otherwise
be somewhat destabilizing and upsetting
now there's plenty of controversy about
whether it's even possible to
de-oscillate the business cycle it's not
obvious to me that it is but also there
are the so the advantages a little bit
of extension of political and voluntary
control but the disadvantage is or one
of the disadvantages is the production
of of of of devaluation of the currency
inflation essentially and so let's talk
about that a little bit and then let's
turn specifically to the to the order of
the topics in the book sure well let's
look at a few examples
um in the natural world
you have cycles of generation and
degeneration so that means that
production has to come before
consumption
in an inverted economy we see that
consumption is brought forward before
consumption that's debt no just in the
sense that we're trying to stimulate the
economy as though if we stimulate
consumption demand we will somehow
produce more but in the natural world
you first have to produce so that you
have the privilege to consume you know
the farmer has to produce this crop
first
in the natural economy
we see that these Cycles also breed
um growth and Decay so we don't see
anything like infinite growth in the
natural economy whereas in the inverted
economy we look at these abstract
metrics like GDP nominal growth and we
become obsessed with this idea that
we're not only temporally exceptional
but we're constantly just you know
piercing through reality itself and
growing and growing and growing and the
natural economy in the natural world
frugality and savings is a function of
your cooperation with nature you
absolutely have to produce more than you
consume and you have to reserve a
surplus of seed for the following year
so that you can you know sow the seeds
and reap them again it's this cycle
where you first have to sow then you
reap in the inverted economy we see that
you know people are incentivized to
consume first again just like in the
previous example
um but not necessarily safe you know not
really look out for the future to do as
much as they can to increase the
velocity of their activity as much as
they can and and sort of pursue this
this Limitless growth
um in the natural economy we see that
people have a respect for the land and
that they basically want to work in the
land and follow in the activity of their
ancestors because we see that you know
to have an economy in the first place we
have to produce these material things in
an inverted economy you see everyone
being told they have to go to university
or become you know in service of the
power structure you know it's idealized
to work at Google uh the the farmer's
daughter is told that she should go to
university she shouldn't stay and work
the land and produce things but how can
that be true if everyone worked at
Google we wouldn't have the things that
we need to produce there's also like
this sense of prestige that's lost in
the inverted economy and then there's
also this this feature of the natural
economy where people have to cooperate
in a decentralized way you know if you
just look at a community in the plots of
land that's surround it if different
Farmers doing different tasks and
cooperating then you have a blacksmith
and a metalsmith and a you know Barber
and a baker and in the inverted economy
we see Prosperity as coming centrally
from a centrally controlled spigot you
know top down and so it comes from the
center to the periphery
um instead of from the periphery and
building up into a center
and so and then when you get into
something like the rate of interest you
know in a natural economy your rate of
interest if you had one if that was how
the society wants to organize itself
it's not the only way uh through through
lending but if it does it would be a
function of the of the material
Prosperity you know the the harvest That
season the amount of capital you
produced from the earth uh and in the in
the inverted economy you know a bunch of
people sit in a room and decide
arbitrarily what the rate of interest
should be and as we see they can be um
coerced by uh political interests you
know to bail out political failures or
Folly and so just you know take another
account so you're saying in in some part
that as you abstract away from the
natural or you introduce the possibility
an increased possibility of merely human
manipulation for purposes that have
nothing to do with the maintenance and
stabilization of the productive natural
order so you're you're devolving away
from the natural ethic that's imposed On
You by the principles and constraints
now it's how do you distinguish that
from just a romanticization of the state
of nature you know because there there's
Echoes of that in some sense in what
you're saying well I'll give you an
example so so let's look at a live
example
um we see that in Europe there's a war
and we see that politicians are saying
that you know the the the the the issue
with the war economically speaking as
it's creating uh an energy short
shortage of energy and so our job as
politicians is to solve this problem so
that we can steer the economy back to
the track that it was before
uh and so my question would be what
exactly is that track like were we on
the right track before in in what data
set were we on the right track and the
fact that over the last 30 years we just
see you know rich people getting richer
the fact that it's harder to buy a house
harder to pay for you know education for
Health Care
um inflation uh run amok the quality of
our products diminishing the
craftsmanship
um obviously within the technology
bubble we might argue that we're seeing
some phenomenal things and that may be
true you know it may be true that
materially uh as as regards to material
technological peripherals things are
incredible but in almost everything else
you know the quality of your clothes and
the quality of your
um you know actual artifacts that are
made by hand uh they're terrible and so
I don't think that we have observed
um
you know this system working in the
sense of producing material abundance or
Prosperity I I've said this before but
the whole notion of prosperity uh has
become divorced from the tangible side
of it you know which is basically food
on the table a warm place to live you
know knowing that if I work hard my
children will have an opportunity to do
better than me but more people around
the world seem to be experiencing that
proportionally say than than 50 years
ago yes and so that's sort of what I
meant by the romanticization I mean oh
you have you think more people are doing
better today than 50 years well
proportionally I don't think that's true
yeah I mean maybe in the developing
nations no that's what I meant I meant
in the developing Nation yeah but
they're doing that because their
economies are more oriented towards the
real so they're the ones producing all
the things that we in the western so you
think we've hit a kind of asymptote in
some fundamental sense in the developed
countries so it's reflected in such
things as the ever escalating price of
housing for young people yeah and just
you know it also expresses itself in
society and just you know this this the
decadence of the western society and
these individualism and selfishness and
the subjectivity that's creeped into our
objective disciplines in in school in
Academia
um and you also in our consequence of
being decoupled in some sense from the
natural order absolutely I think that's
anything anything that's contrary to the
Natural Order of Things uh is going to
find uh you know itself at the center of
our culture that's an interesting
philosophical claim because you could
imagine the Western culture is really uh
an intermixture of two ideas of logos
right so there was a an objective logos
idea that was primarily Greek which was
the idea that in the natural order
there's an implicate order of things and
that there's a moral structure to that
that's implicit in in the world as such
right and then on the more
judeo-christian side the idea of order
was exemplified more particularly on the
spiritual and and personality side and
then the web and the West in some sense
is the laying of the personal logos on
top of the objective logos and the
proposition that there's an isomorphism
between the two and your argument seems
to be to some degree so the nietzschean
argument is that we've dispensed with
God and are floundering about in
nihilism or ideological possession as a
consequence but your argument is well
we've done the same thing from the
bottom up we've divorced ourselves from
the implicant order of the actual world
and that's also destabilizing us well
morally and practically just is that is
that a reasonable absolutely I I think
that you know I don't make arguments to
that extent in the book I give hints at
it and I actually have a footnote where
I say I think this would be profitable
for other people to do
um but I certainly think that the
relationship between
that natural standard of measure and
reward which the real economy is subject
to and the rest of society having that
ability to temporarily forget about that
standard decouple from that it's a fact
of nature so at some point the natural
order exerts its fault you know I've
often liked I like dealing with real
scientists I like dealing with Engineers
I like being dealing with Craftsmen and
high quality work man and I think the
reason for that is that they're always
testing their abstractions against
something that isn't merely arbitrarily
human so they pop themselves out of the
postmodern bubble yes and they're
they're orientation in the world isn't a
mere consequence of their rationality
right it's got this empirical element to
it and within that empirical element
there's a kind of unethical logos and so
it keeps the conversation honest let me
turn to your book okay so we'll just so
again for everyone watching the book
that that Roy has recently published and
he self-published it for reasons we may
get into later perhaps on The Daily wire
side of this the book is called the
natural order of money it's quite
beautiful book it's very elegant it's
very short book and it's very tightly
edited although it's also a book
that for me indicated you know one of
the ways that you can distinguish high
quality thought in some sense from low
quality thought is that
ever you can tell in the high quality
book that every sentence has been
thought through using multiple sentences
that aren't in the book right so there's
a depth of idea that that uh has been
compacted into the concepts and there's
an Elegance of presentation and it's a
beautiful book and so that's also
extraordinarily interesting but it's
it's very straightforwardly written it
reminds me in that sense of Matthew
pajo's recent book called uh this the
the language of creation which is about
this long and and is analogous to this
book in some ways although more on the
theological side so this book has eight
chapters and so I'll start there's a
little chapter summaries at the
beginning and I'll just throw them at
Roy for now and he can comment on them
so chapter one what makes cooperation
possible and sustainable between people
in the natural world we must turn to the
Natural order modern economic theory
deals with analysis in a mathematical
vacuum removed from its wider ecological
environment this work this book is an
exercise and natural philosophy that is
occupied with the synthesis of the
leaving living breathing economy now we
probably covered that yes
time is the fundamental superseding law
of nature it moves forward and is
irreversible Human Action is beholden to
the requirements of the present
contemporary economics tends to ignore
the condition of our temporality there's
one let's we haven't delved into that
particularly so what do you mean by that
contemporary economics tends to ignore
the condition of our temporality
so the moment that you take the
moment of production or activity and you
abstract it into some kind of symbolic
value
um
you're representing something there is
some truth there but as you aggregate
those values and you begin to refer to
them in the way that you refer to either
a stock index or a GDP uh graph over
time
you've completely
stripped that that measure from anything
real so you're adding layers of
abstraction yes and it gets more
untenable as the abstraction layers it's
measuring nothing at the very least
um everything has changed since the time
you've published The Measure you know
like at the very least that's that's one
problem
um but the but the real issue is that
you're trying to
um
you're lying to yourself you're saying
that somehow I can quantify all of this
multifarious economic activity and you
also allow yourself to have another
party in this case the government
um run deficits or spend money and get
the G in the GDP by growing it and so
it's it's just a a false metric you know
it's kind of like grading your own paper
if if you could conceive of this well we
had started to talk a little bit about
um the dangers of abstraction away from
the fundamental economy and one of the
dangers there is well the danger of
government produced inflation because
one of the things that governments can
do they're supposed to be printing money
let's say to smooth out the business
cycle but the problem is of course that
when you're using a fiat currency that
isn't grounded to something fundamental
is that you can print money more or less
at when yes and then you rob the people
who are savings that's what we're saving
essentially and as you print Fiat money
the GDP increases nominally right so
your measure looks good yeah it's it's
basically like it doesn't reflect the
underlying yeah it's sustainable it
reflects nothing you you want to look at
you know more tangible measures if
you're looking to measure the health of
an economy start with the fertility rate
because that's going to be where your
real growth comes from
um and so or or start with the amount of
weight of products that you produce
right so so we should just point out for
everyone who's listening that's actually
a pretty radical proposition because the
ethos of our time is that a low birth
rate is better because there's too many
damn people on the planet anyways and
you just made the proposition that a
more fundamental measure of human
flourishing would actually be a positive
birth rate absolutely but I don't think
we even know if we're at that limit or
not because we don't compare the
fertility rate to what our productive
capacity is in the nation you know we're
we're mixing services with real economic
activity and then we're measuring them
and so the services can be measured
there's a lot of really incredible uh
analyzes and um products that that
central banks and and I can endemic
economists come out with which I think
do shed light on a lot of very
interesting questions within the service
economy within the subjective side of
the economy but they cannot be the
national lodestar you know it just goes
back to what I said the majority I mean
I actually think the majority of the
people should probably be in the real
economy I think it's bizarre that you
have this situation where a great
majority of the people are not working
in the land or are not involved with the
extraction of these fundamental things
and I think that what ends up happening
in a recession of the kind that we're
facing now but also of the kind we're
going to keep facing given where we are
in this overall Arc of the western
development of the economy since the
suspension uh of the redeemability of
money into gold in 1971 is people will
revert back to the Natural economy you
know they will recognize that it's
becoming a Fool's error and trying to
live in a city and and make ends meet
and have you know terrible air quality
and all of the things when they can
literally buy a plot of land somewhere
and you know start start a homestead and
live off their land and so I think that
that's literally what happens in a
recession that's a natural recession if
the government doesn't get involved and
try to stimulate and try to keep all the
thoughts decomposes the the excess
levels of abstraction yeah and you know
the objector will respond and say well
what are you talking about you know look
at the Great Depression how what were
people supposed to do they were in soup
you know they were standing in line for
their bread they where would they go and
the answer is that well but what was the
government policy leading up to the
Great Depression you know the the
government incentivized stock market
speculation millions of people own
stocks there were bucket shops on every
corner of the street and well it is an
open question always how much of that
cyclical activity you actually want to
suppress right so the idea would be to
suppress the cyclical activity and
produce a linear growth
well the problem with that is is that
even in in well within us yeah our life
is actually a very very delicate balance
between proper death and proper
regeneration so any cell lines that you
have that don't die are cancerous right
so I mean the only reason you're able to
live is because you're dying optimally
all the time yes so so the idea that
life is nothing but growth that's what
cancer is is a life that's nothing but
growth I think there has to be death and
replacement as a precondition for life
in some real sense so if you flatten
that out of the economy there's no
you're your point I think is that
there's no signal that you've gone
astray if you artificially suppress like
a recession because a recession is a
form of death inside that's right that's
right yes that that line you mentioned I
I've read it before somewhere yeah that
the the policy of a cancer cell is
infinite growth right exact philosophy
of a cancer yes yes yes yeah that's
that's a great line
um yeah
um no well and you can see that
reflected in certain kinds of
environmentalist fatalism right but
remember these are Cancers on the planet
right and this is pursue this infinite
growth policy and we want people to be
more prosperous but that doesn't mean
that growth can and this is where I
think your work is so interesting it
doesn't mean that growth can occur in a
completely abstracted manner that
doesn't take into account the underlying
fundamental principles of the of the
principles of the natural world and it
does go back to time though with this
with regards to this because the whole
point we're trying to say is that time
moves forward and is irreversible so any
of your your actions are always taking
place in what we call the present you
know you're always living in the present
the past is you know available to you
through recollection and the future is
is coming but it's sort of like always a
present that's becoming the future and
becoming the present
um but at some point you do know that
it's finite you know that you're going
to die and and everything grows and
decays and so
um the idea of infinite growth is is
already an illusion in the sense that
it's it's lying to you as though you're
going to outlive you know your own life
some way through economic contributions
and you're not what's going to happen is
is you can make a contribution to the
economy and through your Offspring
perhaps you know bequeath something to
them which then you know imparts on them
a sense of responsibility both to the
land to the community to the state
etc etc
um but it's really not all about that
you know in in Latin uh you know the
word otum um
means uh Leisure and the word negotium
means business so business is defined as
not Leisure and I think that's another
thing that we we lose when we
denaturalize the economy we lose the
fact that our goal here is to work for
the sake of leisure it's not to work
every single day for the rest of our
lives there's a time for work and
there's a time for leisure and I think
that in general in modern society
most people are working all the time you
know even in the way that they may have
forgotten how to have Leisure at all
yeah even in the way that they're
ostensibly having Leisure it's still
this very quantitative technical work
based gamified experience where there's
a zero sum you know how many likes did I
get how many tweets did I do today how
many followers do I have uh did you see
this person over here did you see that
everything is just constantly being
ranked in this quantitative way which is
actually entirely subjective and
manipulable whereas what they're really
supposed to do is produce a surplus
which then allows them to either have a
family bequeath that Surplus to the
family or live off their remaining days
in in pursuing some form of leisure it
could be playing golf or it could be
coming closer to God you know that that
is that is uh within their uh Free Will
and rights to do but this idea of
constantly working or even a a country
just constantly working is is so bizarre
and you know this is actually what China
does
China is a corporation disguised as a
country you know they're basically
generating a profit on on the back of
out competing with the rest of the world
and and so on an economic level that's a
problem because it's true and and the
West has to deal with that but on a
philosophical level on a cultural level
that's one of the advantages we might
have in that they don't really tend
towards leisure in the way that I think
we can we used to here in the West
so that's also part of the manner in
which the ethic in some sense has gone
astray you have ever more work tracing
ever more growth forgetting the fact
that the purpose of of work in some
senses you said to enable Leisure and
say to enable play yes play perhaps
being the opposite of toil yes and that
that's a true loss of of richness in
life right right now we're supposed to
work but but there has to be a balance
chapter four the human Cooperative
system is also thermodynamic there's a
chain of temporal energy dependency in
which the first cause of an economy is
those who work with nature to Source
Foods fuels and Elemental substances the
real economy generates energy
embodiments the service economy only
consumes them so what do you mean by
energy embodiments so energy embodiments
is anything that's produced uh from the
earth that can be weighed divided and
shared and I specifically say anything
that's produced from you know by the by
the by the work of the human hand uh
from the earth so it can be a salt it
can be the cattle it can be a gold it
can be silver it's any commodity
essentially well it's very interesting
that you tie that into thermodynamics I
was I was talking to a neuroscientists
recently um whose name momentarily
Escapes Me Tristan and uh
um
we discussed the relationship of human
emotion to entropy so imagine you can
calculate entropy by Computing the
distance between your goal and your
current reality and that's a path length
right so there's a certain distance that
you have to Traverse to get to where
you're going and that distance requires
a certain amount of energy and that
energy that the that distance is
equivalent to the entropy of the
distance between your vision and your
goal
um if that distance increases rapidly
that's an entropy increase that's what
happens when a tool fails right because
you don't know how to use it in
relationship to the goal it makes you
anxious anxiety is actually a signal of
unexpected entropy increase and then
positive emotion interestingly enough is
a signal of entropy decrease so you feel
positive emotion for example when you're
moving towards a goal so decreasing
entropy and the movement works so now
you're closer to the goal so the whole
the whole emotional system is also
thermodynamic fundamentally in its
essence and you're you're making the
point that the primary the point of the
primary economy is to produce the
Commodities that
have an intrinsic entropy reduction
it's not just entropy right because it's
also the provision of material resources
like direct food I know that some of
that's energy some of it's the
reconstitution of of the material
substrate as well yeah right so so I
think I'm using energy and entropy I
think in a different way from how a
physicist might use it and perhaps even
how you just used it the way I think
about energy and entropy after uh
wrestling with this concept for a long
time is I think energy is best described
as the generative force in nature an
entropy is best described as the
degenerative force in nature yeah so so
I'd say that's the same yeah it's the
same so I concentrated on a different
element yeah of course of course yeah
but like so so the you know the rows
blooming in springtime is is energy and
and that same Rose withering literally
dying in front of your eyes is entropy
but then but nature you know dies and
then is reborn again you know this the
same nature the same plant will will die
and then give birth all over again it's
it's like it dies and renews and I think
that's uh just just really well you know
you know Schrodinger the physicists
basically Defined Life as an
anti-entropic uh phenomenon that's right
so so there's something very fundamental
about this I'm going to read
three chapters
specifically and then I think we'll
close this out concentrating on what
they concentrate on because this turns
to the issue of money ecological
accountability
is a fact of nature of all human
Cooperative systems so the idea there
would be if you transgress against the
principles of ecology you're playing a
non-playable game you're going to fail
only the service economy is able to
artificially and temporarily ignore
ecological accountability the
environmentalists make a case like that
although it's more of an explicitly
anti-industrial case right when
ecological accountability is manipulated
or forgotten so that's the relationship
between the economy and the underlying
environmental structure the relationship
between the real and service economies
becomes parasitic very interesting turn
of phrase there parasitic because it
means a parasite actually destroys the
source of value well-conscious right
yeah yeah yeah so there's nothing about
it that renews and revivifies the the
natural standard must be reified and
extended to all members ensuring that
ecological accountability remains at the
heart of cooperation so the idea there
in some sense this natural standard to
be reified means that the signal that it
contains has to be propagated reliably
through the abstractions of the system
that's right okay ecological
accountability this is where it gets
more practical is not an ideal or
promise but a lived reality and then we
switch to Money Money extends the
natural standard so that's that's the
key element of your book in some real
sense yes genuine money extends the
natural standard in an ecologically
valid manner that's your claim because
it's taking that natural standard and
it's reflecting it in the object itself
it has it has two features any commodity
has two features it's a measure in the
sense that it's a weight of something
relative to other things relative to the
farmer's Harvest this season relative to
the amount of land right so it contains
an intrinsic information yes but this
information is changing relative to the
Natural order but the natural order is
the is the Arbiter but then it's also a
reward in the sense that irrespective of
whether it's a good measure or a bad
measure it's something you need as an
input you can do something with it it's
useful and so every commodity has that
feature uh and and and so when we so
your notion with Fiat money is that it's
stripped of its intrinsic information
it's neither a measure nor a reward I
mean it's it's which is why the Nobel
Laureate would have been able to say
well the only difference between copper
and gold is subjective yeah yeah but you
know it's funny because Aristotle in the
politics says that money shouldn't be
pursued for its own sake it has to be
something that's a good that's useful
and the Fiat money is something that's
just pursued for its own sake you don't
receive the Fiat money so you can do it
so that's another place where it's
ethically uncoupled is because it
doesn't have that intrinsic value or you
get the idea usefulness and remember in
the cryptocurrency space they've been
trying to tell us now and and you know I
have a a great respect for the crypto
cryptocurrency space but they've been
trying to tell somebody well it's things
can have utility by virtue of them just
being a medium of exchange with exchange
onwards and they build scary City into
it yes but I just don't think that's
true right you know I I think that
nobody you think about it even in
financial markets nobody just wants to
have Fiat money sitting in their bank
account they want to invest the Fiat
money to generate some interest they
want to buy a stock they want to buy
property so so right nobody actually
wants to just sit and own the fiat
currency unless they're buying it on
Leverage relative to some other fiat
currency like the Japanese Yen well why
can't you say the same thing about gold
because the gold always has that
embedded optionality to its owner I can
sell it to someone that needs to turn it
into jewelry or I can sell it to NASA
which needs to add it to a rocket or I
can sell it to Apple which is right so
at minimum it always has that
fundamental yeah your choice to take the
gold and treat it as what's called a
storehouse of value doesn't change its
intrinsic natural utility okay so then
you say
money extends the natural standard
promoting cooperation well re while
reflecting ecological accountability
that's a very nice sentence by the way
it's a good example of the Elegance of
your writing I would say because that's
a very tight sentence promoting
cooperation while reflecting the
ecological accountability you can think
about that ethically because what that
means is if it promotes cooperation then
it's a medium of exchange that helps us
play socially sustainable games that's
right but if it can also simultaneously
reflects the natural order then not only
does it help us play socially
sustainable games it helps us play the
small class of socially sustainable
games that are also environmentally
sustainable right so then you get a
balance of that logo top-down logo
that's right and bottom up okay okay
what I'm doing there is I'm basically
going back 150 years to the point at
which uh William Stanley G Vons in 1875
introduces these terms unit of account
medium of Exchange store value to a
lesser extent standard of value which
have become the rigor in any discussion
about money these days
and I'm trying to show that the the the
main function of money goes beyond it's
it's more than the function of just
allowing the farmer who has a surplus of
corn to sell his corn for money so that
the barber can you know basically buy
the corn with the money that someone
pays him it's it's actually making sure
that every single member of the economy
is accountable to the real wealth that's
being produced and and I think that the
the whole notion of a store value
follows from that because today we're
told that anything happens that's why
you say money is more than it's
incidental features yes and today we're
told that anything can be a store of
value if someone subjectively decides to
just hold on to it so we say you know
art is a store of value but when you
think about it the way that money was
was understood before this
denaturalization of the economy was that
it was a store of value not because I
just subjectively want it and I don't
care what it's worth but hopefully it's
scarce and it'll be worth more one day
it was that I want to hold on to this
thing because I know that everyone else
recognizes that this thing is something
that they might need in the future right
right and that has a deep intrinsic
value that's tied to Nature itself
another anti-post modern argument in
some sense so chapter seven this is
where we turn to the nature of money
itself that's the signal and medium of
exchange but but also as something that
contains intrinsic information about the
structure of the sustainable of the
world and sustainability in the world a
superior money
will be resistant to entropy so that
would be Decay so it's permanent a
storehouse and reliable and unchanging
spatially as well and rare or difficult
to extract from nature because otherwise
it would be so plentiful you can't use
air as a medium of exchange true money
will neither be food nor fuel because
it's consumable then but rather an
elemental substance elements are
naturally scarce meaning that each
element exhibits certain unchanging
qualities and then at the Apex gold is
the Apex element within the natural
order of money expand on that a bit go
now that has to do with its scarcity and
its and its nobility that's a global map
but it's important to state that when I
say true money there I'm saying in a
post-subsistent society
so as the society has matured and it's
become complex and there's a division of
labor and there's a market at that point
it wouldn't make sense to use the most
necessary inputs the food not only
because they're subject to entropy no
lettuce last six days
but also because it's better for the
economy to use those inputs rather than
just hold on to them for the sake of
measuring rewarding there's something so
Gold's got that weird balance where it
has a utility yes but but the utility
isn't so overwhelming and so immediate
that it can't be used as a as a bank its
utility is money is more important for a
well-functioning post-subsistent society
than its utility right as a commodity
right that doesn't mean that it doesn't
oscillate it it still oscillates well
that's a very interesting proposition
right that gold has that strange balance
it's not so useful that you have to use
it that's right but it's not so useless
that it has no intrinsic value that's
right right whereas with silver we find
that it's it's a lot more industrial it
has a lot more industrial use so even
though silver might be embraced as money
you still need loads of it for industry
the thing about gold is it has you know
there's there's an aspect of elements
called specific gravity it's one of
these features qualitative features and
gold has a specific gravity that's so
high which means that as you condense
more weight of it it occupies a very
small volumetric space right so if you
were to take a sugar cube sized of pure
silver or a sugar cube size of pure gold
you would find the gold is just heavier
even though it occupies the same
volumetric space and so what I'm trying
to say is that the amount of gold that
we have so it's value density it's
something like that yeah you might say
value density like energy density you
could say that definitely I mean in
terms of the amount of energy that it
took to produce the gold the gold is
representing in less space than anything
else right right so you know efficient
estimate yeah and in my company Goldman
you you know we have a warehouse let's
say we have a billion dollars of silver
well that's going to be Warehouse upon
Warehouse upon Warehouse of silver
you're walking through aisles of silver
bars whereas a billion dollars of gold
would fit right here in this little room
right right um and so so it's also got
that property of efficiency that's right
and and that I think makes it also very
efficient in terms of exchange as being
um something that pays for its own
movement you know it's not it's
inexpensive to move it doesn't require
as much energy to move and easy to hide
in some real sense too yeah perhaps uh
but well that that could be real
relevant when someone's after your after
your Storehouse of value yeah yeah but
but the thing is there is that because
of that feature of gold
um you don't need so much of it
volumetrically for industry what ends up
happening is that we use as a society
the the lowest amount of gold the
smallest amount of gold that we need to
do the things that we can't do with any
other element so in your phone there's a
part of your phone there's a certain
soldered connecting joints where we have
to use gold Apple doesn't want to use
them right right but it has to so it
uses just the bare minimum that it needs
but it's still a couple of dollars worth
of gold per phone and and so so we're
constantly using just kind of the lowest
amount of gold that we need yeah so it's
interesting what what you're proposing
in some sense like a good game is bound
by rules which isn't really a good way
of thinking about them because rules and
laws sound like they're walls but that's
not really true a good game has
principles that enable a lot of activity
right and
and the better the best game has the
best rules in some real sense and so
and and again the best game we've
already alluded to this to some degree
the best game is one we both want to
play and that can play for a long time
and that maybe even improves as we play
it but that would also be a game that we
could do that with that would be
that would allow us to stay in Harmony
in some real sense with the natural
world yes so we want a set of principles
that enables cooperation that's the next
thing you say here honestly when money
is gold this is probably the key
sentence certainly to the introduction
and and you repeat it this is that this
is a repetition about an appropriate one
when money is gold
cooperation between people and nature is
sustainable well that's the thesis of
your book fundamentally in one sentence
right and so
um and part of the reason I'm talking to
you today is because I'm still trying to
evaluate that thesis it's a bold thesis
I in in some real sense if it's true I
haven't been able to figure out why it
might not be true because I do believe
that
obviously we can't decoupler economic
system from empirical reality any more
than we can decouple our conceptual
systems from biology or if we do we're
going to pay a big price for it I
believe well let me propose a solution
to that quandary um
you know some of the greatest errors in
history have begun as you know logical
uh
logical axioms that made sense at some
level but then after yes Marxism yeah
and then you conceptualize it and you
realize you know it's like that Meme
where you see the Domino and you you
know you push one Domino and then you
end up yeah yeah yeah so right the
axioms sound good in in principle yeah
so my response to that would be well if
you're on the side of what I just said
you're essentially on the side of all of
the traditional wisdom that is
characterized the development of the
western world and if you're on this
other side you're in a brief period of
History to which we observe a great deal
of of issues and then I would raise you
and say well what is the other
alternative because the I'm not going to
be convinced that the current system
that we have is a valid alternative I
think it's a terrible system it's a
parasitic system it has dyspeptic
symptoms such as inflation and wealth
inequality and I think also
environmental damage and to that end
The Germ and the environmental movement
is coming from the right place they've
identified that our ways are
antagonistic to nature but their
solution is arrogant in the sense that
it's also top down incentives exactly an
abstract exactly they're not troll
they're not letting nature take its
course and and and the real solutions to
any potential now I this is a bottom-up
solution right in some real centralized
well that's why you said what the other
thing I like about it's got this fractal
nature in some sense right so your
notion is is that if gold in some real
sense reflects the natural order and use
gold as the signal of measure that prop
that permeates the entire system the
system is being corrected at all of its
subsidiary levels simultaneously it's
not a top-down corrective and I'll give
you a perfect example if gold is money
when you have growth you get deflation
prices come down because the gold is
always that rarest longest lasting thing
so when you produce more things relative
to the gold that means the price of
those things declines conversely when
you have a slow down in economic
activity relative to a pass point the
prices are going to rise but the price
is rising are basically telling people
that they have to go out and produce
more real things and and it's just it's
a concept it's so hard to conceive of
you know we've lived with inflation for
so many years now it is possible to have
inflation under gold standard of course
but that would reflect a Slowdown of
economic activity or a shortage of
certain things right gold right well
that wouldn't be inflation exactly that
would be scarcity yeah and but doesn't
is it doesn't it sound amazing that you
could live in an economy where as you
were prospering prices you know were
lower and don't you remember in the in
the tech world where we saw that like
with flat screen TV there was this
productivity where you know or even with
certain vehicles
um that used to be the way of the world
for every industry you know and that was
the the engine which actually allows
people still argue that that's occurring
you know I interviewed Marion tupi yeah
the book super abundance that makes some
claims that are contrary to yours
um but you're you're concentrating more
on the rise in asset prices like housing
very very basic asset prices that seem
to be you know in in some sense escaping
from people's grip well he and I I would
disagree with the methodology in his
book and you know I'd be happy happy to
talk about it but I I will get the two
of you together at some point on that
yeah I'd love to I on that sense you
know
if you talk to anyone on the street
that's over you know 30 years old they
will tell you that in their lifetime the
cost of everything has gone up
every single person will tell you that
now when those people have to express
that view politically they're being
offered two kinds of responses
irrespective of a political party one
response is it's true I'm going to help
you vote for me but then there's another
that's a centralizing control Yes again
but then there's another response which
is
oh no no you're wrong you're wrong let
me bedazzle you with quantitative
abstractions let me show you why you're
wrong and well it is tricky because we
do have these remarkable cell phones for
example it's not easy to quantify their
value let's say well yeah but what is
the value of all the all the bookshops
that we lost because of you know Amazon
and what is the value of the record
shops that we lost what is the value of
diversity that was there and the diverse
and decentralization you know we're both
this is an issue measurement isn't it in
the Cold War one of the great Arguments
for the superiority of of the of the
West versus Russia was that you'd go
into a supermarket and you would see
just so many Brands diversity but today
you go to a western supermarket and it's
basically the same kind of packaging the
brands your craft Heinz owns half the
aisles right so your argument in some
sense
because our measurements are wrong like
fundamentally none of the calculations
that we're making in relationship to
abundance are actually valid yeah and I
would also have a have a quarrel with
this metric of uh GDP per hour is worked
I I don't think that that well we'll
we'll have we'll arrange this discussion
at some point and see what we can hash
out I'm going to read the rest of the
summary of Chapter eight and then I
guess we'll we'll we'll bring this part
to a halt I'm going to talk to Roy for
another half an hour you all know this
by now or many of you who are listening
on The Daily wire plus platform I often
walk through
um someone's life biographically I might
do that with Roy but there's there's
other places we can take this so I'm
still deciding on that
um anyways here's the summary of the
eighth and Final Chapter when money is
gold
and as I said that's the fundamental
thesis of the book when money is gold
cooperation between people and nature is
sustainable that's a hell of a claim
that'd be interesting to see what people
make of that in the comments when money
is gold cooperation between people and
nature is sustainable gold money remains
a stable measure and reward in both
generative and degenerative cycles and
then he concludes with this we live in
an age of contrived monies reflected
let's say in voluntary inflation the
printing of money and parasitic
economies the definition there would be
economies that are bubbling upward but
not replenishing The Source that's a
good way of thinking about it
a solution must be given by Nature
and not the service economy and then the
closing is gold
it's quite it's quite a it's quite a
claim
gold is the perfect mirror of ecological
accountability
so well
it's hard for me to evaluate the book
you know
um because I'm not an expert in these
topics I've read a lot of books this
seems to me to be a very good book it's
very clear I found the argument very
compelling it's very interesting
argument at least there may be things
wrong with it that I certainly don't
understand there's probably things wrong
with it that you don't understand but I
definitely enjoyed reading it and it's
made it's given me an awful lot to think
about and I do think it's beautifully
written and is also a beautiful book so
that's the natural order of money if
you're interested in this discussion I
would recommend the book it's pretty
short read it's pretty damn clear and
I'd like to thank Roy for talking to me
today thank you and for all of you
watching and listening on YouTube and
the associated podcast thank you very
much for your time and attention to the
film crew that's here today they they
came in from from London
um uh suddenly and unexpectedly let's
say so that was very helpful to the
Daily wire plus people thank you for
facilitating these conversations and uh
I guess it's not too late in the year to
wish everyone happy New Year One More
Time thank you for your time and
attention
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com